000
FXUS64 KFWD 261159
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
659 AM CDT Thu Sep 26 2019


.AVIATION...
/12Z TAFs/

Concerns: Temporary N-NE wind shift at the Metroplex terminals
this morning.

A cold pool dominated cluster of showers and thunderstorms across
the Ark-La-Tex region continues to weaken and propagate southward
this morning, mainly impacting the Bonham cornerpost. An outflow
boundary associated with the convection has pushed out well ahead,
oriented from northwest to southeast along a KDUC-KGYI-KSLR line.
A N-NE wind shift has persisted at observation sites behind the
boundary prior to returning to S-SE flow. Sites behind the
boundary have reported wind speeds from 15-20 knots with gusts
close to 25-30 knots. Opted to include a TEMPO group to account
for a temporary shift to N-NE winds from 13-15Z at DFW, DAL, and
AFW, and 14-16Z for FTW and GKY based on the current speed of the
boundary.

There is a low potential for thunderstorms to develop this
afternoon, but this will highly depend on the location of the
outflow boundary. Confidence remains too low to warrant a mention
at this time, but overall trends will continue to be monitored.
Otherwise, VFR will prevail through the forecast period with
daytime cumulus clouds expected this afternoon.

Garcia

&&


.SHORT TERM... /Issued 340 AM CDT Thu Sep 26 2019/
/Through Friday/

North and Central Texas remains under the influence of a mid-level
ridge, resulting in tranquil conditions this morning. Across
portions of eastern Oklahoma and western Arkansas, a cluster of
strong thunderstorms and an outflow boundary continues to
propagate southeastward. The latest HREF members and their
previous model runs continue to indicate this activity may reach
the northeastern zones by daybreak, with only a very low chance of
some isolated showers reaching locales near the Metroplex. The
highest PoPs (near 30%) will remain across the far eastern Red
River counties through the morning hours.

An overall weakening trend is anticipated with the cluster of
thunderstorms through the morning and early afternoon hours as the
cluster becomes displaced from the parent upper level trough and
the surface front weakens. However, any remnant outflow boundaries
will be features that bear watching during the afternoon hours
across North Texas, mainly near and north of the I-20 corridor.
While large scale forcing for ascent will not be in place,
sufficient moisture content remains in place. Afternoon
instability will increase (MLCAPE values upwards of 2000 J/kg) and
locations will approach or exceed their convective temperature.
As a result, it remains possible that some isolated showers/storms
may develop. Given afternoon high temperatures will be in the mid
to upper 90s across North Texas and model soundings reveal an
inverted-V profile, a gusty wind threat cannot be ruled out. I
maintained slight chance PoPs across the northeastern zones for
this afternoon, but adjustments may be warranted based on the
locations of any boundaries. If any showers or storms develop,
they should diminish in the evening with the loss of daytime
heating.

Tonight and Friday will feature tranquil and mild conditions
across the region. An increasing low-level jet may result in some
morning cloud cover across Central Texas and parts of North Texas
by daybreak Friday. Across the southwestern US, the upper level
low will slowly begin to translate eastward through the end of the
work week. This will result in strengthening southerly winds
close to 10-15 mph.

Otherwise, I did trend toward the warmer side of guidance given
the previous days high and low temperatures were a few degrees
above model blends. Temperatures through the end of the work week
will remain 10-12 degrees above seasonal normals for late September.


Garcia

&&

.LONG TERM... /Issued 340 AM CDT Thu Sep 26 2019/
/Saturday through Wednesday/

The last part of September and the first few days of October will
be unseasonably hot across North and Central Texas with high and
low temperatures running about 5 to 10 degrees above normal. There
are rain/storm chances sprinkled in throughout the forecast, but
the probability for measurable rain at any given location isn`t
any higher than 50 percent through the weekend. There is still a
chance that some areas may see some relief from the heat, but
uncertainty in the extended part of the forecast remains high.

For the upcoming weekend, model guidance continues to indicate
that the closed and cut-off low across the Pacific Southwest will
slowly emerge and eject out into the southern Great Plains. Model
guidance does reveal that the PV anomaly associated with the
upper low will be a tad stronger (a deeper 1.5 PVU surface). This
equates to stronger mid/upper level frontogenesis which should
yield a stronger jet aloft. Indeed, guidance now indicates that
the jet will be closer to the 70-75 knot range and a little
farther south than indicated in previous model iterations. This
places North and Central Texas closer to the RRQ of the upper jet
and thus large scale ascent. I`ll keep PoPs at or just below 50
percent during the pre-dawn hours, mainly across western Texoma
and the northern Big Country where jet entrance forcing is likely
to be most pronounced. In addition, the stronger low level wind
field should promote modest theta-e transport northward and
facilitate an environment conducive for showers/storms.

PoPs through the day on Saturday remain on the low side. There
are two areas that will have slightly better rain/storm chances.
1) The first is along the immediate Red River Valley where some
lingering jet entrance forcing may continue. 2) The other location
will be down across Central Texas where some streamer shower type
activity may develop. There`s a decent chance that areas between
these geographic regions mentioned above will remain largely void
of any showers/storms as they`ll be removed from a focus for
ascent. One other plausible scenario is that most locales remain
rain/storm-free on Saturday due to the implied subsidence
associated with mid-level height rises behind the departing trough.
High temperatures on Saturday will likely remain in the mid 90s
for most locations, except along the Red River, where cloud cover
may be the most dense and rain/storms persist. The surface
pressure gradient should remain tight to support 15 to 25 MPH
breezes.

Sunday still presents a forecast challenge. The mid-level ridge
will make an attempt to slowly retrograde westward. While height
rises are not as pronounced on Sunday and low level moisture may
increase some, the lack of a discernible lifting mechanism lowers
confidence in widespread rain/storms as advertised by blended
guidance. With that in mind, I continue to undercut blended
guidance`s likely to near categorical PoPs in favor of slight
chances for rain/storms. The Big Country stands to have the best
chance for rain/storms as this location will be the most removed
from the mid-level ridge and remain in closer proximity to
slightly richer dewpoints. Higher resolution model guidance should
be able to assist with the PoP forecast the closer we get to
Sunday (and may result in either the increase or removal of PoPs).
While the increase in moisture may result in more clouds, highs
on Sunday will still remain unseasonably warm with readings in the
mid 90s.

Through at least the middle of next week, rain chances appear
very low and the warm conditions are likely to persist as the mid-
level ridge across the southeast US continues to slowly migrate
westward. The first few days of October will feel more like early
September as highs in the low to mid 90s are still advertised. So
will it cool down across the region next week? Well, the only
glimmer of hope that we have will be Thursday and into Friday. The
Canadian and to some degree the GFS (and many of their ensemble
members) continue to plow a stout front through North and Central
Texas during the late to end part of the work week. The ECMWF does
show FROPA, but the associated CAA is not nearly as great as
suggested by the Canadian and GFS. The overall trend would favor
the ECMWF solution. Given the current spread among model
guidance, however, I will show a slight cool down (temperatures
in upper 80s and low 90s). Rain chances with this front don`t look
great at this time, so I`ll advertise dry conditions. As noted in
previous discussions, the forecast will be subject to change as
subsequent model guidance arrives, so stay tuned.

Bain

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    97  76  95  76  95 /  10   0   0  10  20
Waco                97  74  97  76  97 /   5   0   0  10  20
Paris               89  71  90  72  89 /  30   0   0  10  30
Denton              96  75  95  75  94 /  20   0   5  10  20
McKinney            95  74  94  75  94 /  20   0   0  10  20
Dallas              97  76  95  77  95 /  10   0   0  10  20
Terrell             95  73  95  75  95 /  20   0   0  10  20
Corsicana           96  73  95  75  94 /   5   0   0  10  20
Temple              97  73  96  75  96 /   0   0   5  10  20
Mineral Wells       96  74  94  74  94 /  10   0   5  10  20

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

22/24
