054
FXUS64 KFWD 081139
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
539 AM CST Sun Dec 8 2019

.AVIATION...
/12Z TAFS/

High clouds continue to stream in across the region this morning
and similar to the last few days, this will continue through the
day. Low level moisture is slowly creeping back into the region
though and IFR cigs/vis are prevalent across east and southeast TX
this morning. These low cigs/vis will slowly advance westward over
the next few hours, but increasing and veering low level winds
through the morning should keep the lowest cigs/vis to the east of
the major airports. Southerly winds will increase to 15 to 25 kt
later this morning and should continue through the nighttime
hours.

A strong cold front will move through North Texas on Monday. Winds
will gradually veer around to the west by early Monday morning
ahead of the front with VFR cigs lowering through the morning.
Deteriorating conditions are expected to occur Monday afternoon
and evening, just beyond the current TAF period.

Dunn

&&

.SHORT TERM... /Issued 317 AM CST Sun Dec 8 2019/
/Today and Tonight/

Water vapor and satellite imagery this morning continues to show a
steady stream of Pacific moisture moving through North Texas
mainly in the form of high clouds. All of this is in advance of a
deepening upper trough that will eventually move through the
region bringing us increased rain chances and much colder weather.
Details on this system are below. For today, the strengthening
westerly flow across the Southern Rockies will continue to induce
pressure falls across the TX/OK panhandles through this afternoon.
This will result in strengthening southerly winds and a gradual
veering of the low level flow as the surface low begins to move
eastward this evening. Temperatures should respond upward in
response to the southwest winds above the surface and we should
see highs top out in the low to mid 70s this afternoon. Shallow
moisture is trying to return to the area as evidenced on IR
satellite imagery with an expansive low cloud deck to our east and
widespread dense fog throughout the Coastal Bend. This moisture
will try to work its way north and westward through the day, but
veering winds should keep most of the low clouds to the east of
our area.

By tonight, the surface low over the Panhandle will begin to race
eastward dragging a strong cold front through the Plains. Arctic
air behind this front will spill southward, but will still be to
our north by early Monday morning. Surface winds will become more
westerly overnight and low temperatures will generally be in the
mid to upper 50s.

Dunn

&&

.LONG TERM... /Issued 317 AM CST Sun Dec 8 2019/
/Monday onward/

Key Messages:
(1) A strong cold front on Monday will bring much cooler
temperatures, and increasing rain chances late Monday and into
Tuesday morning.

(2) While the vast majority of our county warning area (CWA) will
see only liquid rain, some light rain/snow mix will be possible
west of a Decatur to Mineral Wells to Goldthwaite line on Tuesday
morning. Wintry weather is not anticipated in either Dallas/Fort
Worth or Killeen/Temple/Waco.

(3) Significant uncertainty remains, especially with regards to
any accumulation potential. Impacts are likely to be minimal, but
anyone planning to travel west of DFW on Tuesday should monitor
the latest forecast information.

A potent shortwave trough is beginning to move onshore across the
Pacific Northwest this morning. The axis of this trough lies along
a line from Edmonton, AB to Spokane, WA to Eureka, CA. GOES-16
water vapor channel imagery shows strong ascent east of this
trough axis, with Pacific moisture beginning to overspread the
Desert Southwest and Southern Rockies. This shortwave trough will
drop southeast across the Southwest over the next 48 hours, and
should be in the vicinity of the New Mexico/Texas state line by
Tuesday morning. Strong height falls ahead of this approaching
shortwave trough will drive a surface cold front through North and
Central Texas during the day Monday. This cold front should enter
our northwestern counties late Monday morning, reach the
Dallas/Fort Worth Metropolitan Area by early afternoon,
Waco/Killeen/Temple by late afternoon, and exit our southeastern
counties by evening.

Areas of rain will likely develop with the initial frontal
passage, but more widespread rainfall should trail the cold front
by several hours. QG diagnostic fields from both the GFS and ECMWF
show the strongest forcing for ascent arriving after midnight
Tuesday (i.e. Monday into Tuesday), and increasing into Tuesday
morning. The combination of strong differential cyclonic vorticity
advection, and strong frontogenesis sloping northwest into the
cold air suggests that ascent will be very strong. For the first
18-24 hours behind the frontal passage, there should also be
plenty of moisture available. For this reason, the largest QPF
and highest PoPs are shown from 12 a.m. Tuesday to 12 p.m.
Tuesday. Likely to definite PoPs (i.e. >=55%) are indicated for
the vast majority of the CWA, with widespread QPF totals of one-
half to one inch likely for most locations.

Now for the reason you`re really reading this: the winter weather
potential. While the ascent looks strong for reasons discussed in
the previous paragraph, and moisture should (initially) be
abundant enough to support precipitation processes, in this case,
the temperature/moisture timing is where the uncertainty lies. A
more classic winter weather/snow event for North Texas typically
involves an upper-level shortwave trough detaching from and
lagging behind a longwave trough. Such a synoptic pattern allows
deep cold air to infiltrate the Southern Plains, with strong lift
and moisture arriving about 24 hours later. In Tuesday`s case,
the shortwave trough looks like it will remain fairly well
attached to the longwave trough, with the synoptic freezing line
likely to still be in the Sooner State on Tuesday morning. Having
said that, the effects of dynamic cooling from the powerful
upper-level ascent, as well as thermodynamic processes from
evaporative cooling should allow temperatures to cool to near or
just below freezing in our western counties. It looks like areas
generally west of a line from Decatur to Mineral Wells to
Goldthwaite would be where this would be most likely to occur. To
the north of this area, dry air may work its way in before
temperatures can cool enough. To the south and east, temperatures
look to be simply too warm. This region, which also has a bit of
elevation working for it, is right in the "sweet spot". After
collaboration with neighboring offices and WPC, have opted to
include a mention of light rain/snow mix for Tuesday morning in
these areas.

In terms of accumulations/impacts, there remains substantial
uncertainty due to uncertainties about how cold it will be Tuesday
morning. Surface temperatures look to be right around freezing
(give or take a couple of degrees), so ground temperatures should
be warm enough to prevent much in the way of meaningful
accumulations. Having said that, should temperatures be a few
degrees cooler than forecast, or precipitation rates be heavier
than expected, some accumulations would be possible. The grids
explicitly mention about one-tenth to one-quarter inch of snow
accumulation in the aforementioned areas, but right now, this
should be viewed as a higher-end scenario. These accumulations
would also likely be confined to elevated surfaces (i.e. bridges
and overpasses) or grassy areas. Any disruptions should be very
minimal, but folks that will be traveling west of the Metroplex on
Tuesday should monitor the latest forecasts.

Precipitation should come to an end across the entire CWA by late
Tuesday evening. Temperatures will be rather chilly Tuesday night,
with temperatures likely to fall below freezing for the entire
CWA. Morning lows on Wednesday will range from mid 20s out around
Eastland, to around 30 in the southeast and in urban areas.

The next upper-level shortwave trough will approach our neck of
the woods on Thursday night and into Friday. Moisture looks to be
quite limited with this late-week system, so PoPs have been kept
on the lower end (which is consistent with the past several
forecast packages).

37

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    72  58  73  37  46 /   0   0  20  70  60
Waco                72  57  79  37  46 /   0   0   5  80  80
Paris               66  56  69  36  44 /   0   0  20  70  50
Denton              71  57  71  34  46 /   0   0  20  70  40
McKinney            69  57  71  35  45 /   0   0  20  70  50
Dallas              73  58  73  37  46 /   0   0  20  80  60
Terrell             69  58  75  37  46 /   0   0  10  80  70
Corsicana           70  59  76  39  45 /   0   0   5  80  80
Temple              73  58  79  39  46 /   0   0   0  80  90
Mineral Wells       74  56  70  33  44 /   0   0  20  70  50

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

91