659
FXUS64 KFWD 091215
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
615 AM CST Mon Dec 9 2019

.AVIATION...
/12Z TAFS/

Main concerns through the period will be a strong cold front which
will bring areas of rain and lowering cigs to the region tonight
into early Tuesday morning and a low chance for some wintry
precipitation.

Southerly winds prevail this morning under a thick canopy of high
clouds. There are some lower clouds across east and southeast
Texas, but these should primarily remain east of the major
airports.  An area of low pressure is located over northern
Oklahoma and will move east during the day today. This will drag a
strong cold front through the region and result in winds becoming
more westerly later this morning then northerly by afternoon.
Cigs will primarily be VFR through the day, although will lower
through the afternoon.

By tonight, as a strong upper disturbance approaches, areas of
rain will develop. This should initially be west of the I-35
corridor, but will overspread the region late tonight. Cigs will
likely lower to MVFR during the late overnight hours with areas
of rain overspreading the airports after 3 am. A further lowering
of cigs is expected through sunrise Tuesday. There is a chance for
some snow to mix in with rain in the 4-8 am timeframe, mainly
northwest of the Metroplex. At this time, we`ve kept any mention
of snow out of the DFW TAF, but a brief mix is certainly in the
realm of possibility. We`ll include -RASN in at AFW from 11Z
through the end of the current TAF period at 12Z, with the
expectation that any wintry mix should end by 14Z. If snow does
indeed mix in with rain around sunrise, then IFR cigs/vis would be
likely. A rapid north to south drying is expected through late
morning on Tuesday and cigs will quickly improve to VFR by midday.

At Waco, similar trends are expected, but the northerly wind
shift will occur around 22Z this afternoon. Areas of rain will
overspread the airport after 5 am. No wintry precipitation is
expected at Waco.

Dunn

&&

.DISCUSSION... /Issued 313 AM CST Mon Dec 9 2019/

Key Messages:
(1) A strong cold front will pass through later today, bringing
much colder temperatures, and increasing rain chances. High
temperatures will occur this morning, with much cooler
temperatures by evening commute. Plan accordingly!

(2) A transition to a rain/snow mix is likely to occur early
Tuesday morning for parts of North Texas, including the
Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex. We are not anticipating any wintry
precipitation in Killeen, Waco, or Temple at this time.

(3) Little to no accumulation is expected for most locations;
however, localized areas could see accumulations of around one
inch on elevated surfaces and in grassy areas.

(4) While impacts for most locations will be minimal to none, some
minor travel issues could arise where heavier snow does occur.

GOES-16 water vapor channel imagery and 500 mb objective analysis
show a deep upper-level trough over much of the western U.S. The
trough axis as of this writing lies along a line from Bismarck, ND
to Denver, CO to San Diego, CA. The southern end of the upper-
level trough appears to be lagging somewhat behind the longwave
trough, and is partially detached from the upper-level flow.
Strong ascent is beginning along the east side of this trough,
with Pacific moisture streaming into the southern tier states. At
the surface, a broad area of low pressure is noted over the
Central Plains, with a cold front extending along a line from
Oklahoma City, OK to Trinidad, CO.

Strong height falls ahead of the approaching upper-level trough
will drive a cold front across North and Central Texas on Monday
afternoon. The cold front should enter our northwestern counties
later this morning, reach the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex by
around noon, Killeen/Temple/Waco mid-afternoon, and exit our
southeastern counties by evening. Strong cold air advection will
result in rapidly falling temperatures. While temperatures are in
the low to mid 60s this morning, high temperatures will likely
occur around noon. By sundown, temperatures will be in the 50s
across much of North Texas, with temperatures dropping into the
40s along the Red River. Gusty northerly winds of 15-20 mph will
result in wind chills in the 40s. This is a long way of saying
don`t let this morning`s warm temperatures fool you! It will be
much chillier by evening commute, so make sure to take an extra
jacket with you if heading out.

Going into the overnight hours, the upper-level trough will
continue its trek towards the Lone Star State, reaching the Big
Bend region by Tuesday morning. The combination of a 120+ KT jet
streak overspreading the region, strong differential cyclonic
vorticity advection, and deep frontogenesis sloping northwest into
the cold air will support powerful ascent across the region. A
steady stream of Pacific moisture in place combined with this
ascent will allow for widespread precipitation to develop late
Monday evening, initially as cold rain.

Things get interesting as we head into Tuesday morning. Forecast
soundings from the GFS and HRRR show very strong ascent within the
dendritic growth zone (i.e. the -10C to -20C layer), along with a
very saturated air mass. This will easily support ice crystal
formation within the cloud layer. Beneath this layer, the column
should be sufficiently humid to allow precipitation to continue
reaching the ground, despite the fact a little dry air could start
working into North Texas. The only question that exists is
whether temperatures will be sufficiently cool to allow
precipitation to remain frozen all the way to the ground. While
the synoptic freezing line will likely still be in Oklahoma,
dynamic cooling from the strong vertical ascent, as well as
evaporative cooling processes should be enough to allow for a
rain/snow mix across parts of North Texas. The transition looks
like it would mostly likely occur from west to east, roughly along
a line from Comanche to Stephenville to Dallas/Fort Worth.

Surface temperatures should remain above freezing, which would
prevent significant accumulations from occurring, but there are
two caveats worth mentioning. The first is that when temperatures
are just above freezing, snowflakes can stick together, forming
large "clumps" of snow. Secondly, if snow were to come down rather
quickly, it could begin to accumulate on elevated surfaces (i.e.
bridges, overpasses, and rooftops) and grassy areas. This will
probably not be the case in most locations, but we will certainly
have to be on alert for any enhanced snow bands that do develop,
which unfortunately is very difficult to forecast at this range.
Snowfall forecast products from the GFS and HRRR using the Kuchera
snow ratio method both suggest the most likely corridor for
heavier snow would be from Dallas/Fort Worth to points southwest,
but notably, the GFS snow depth product (which takes into ground
temperature, melting processes, etc.) shows very little
accumulation. For this reason, we do not plan any winter weather
headlines (i.e. advisories/watches) at this time. Precipitation
should come to an end by Tuesday afternoon across the CWA, with a
cold and dry night to follow.

So what does this all mean for you the citizen? Most likely, we`ll
just see a few snowflakes mixing in with rain on Tuesday morning.
It will be mildly exciting, but most likely not enough to cause
any significant disruptions. Having said that, the potential does
exist for some locally enhanced snowfall, with maximum totals in
a few spots potentially approaching or exceeding an inch. This
means you will want to keep an eye on the forecast. Check back
later this evening, and get up early on Tuesday to see what`s
going on. Winter weather is notoriously difficult to forecast,
even with the major technological advances in the last couple of
decades. It`s even harder in these "marginal" setups that often
occur in North Texas. The best course of action is to be prepared
for the "reasonable high end scenario", which would include the
possibility of some light snow accumulations that could result in
some minor impacts to travel.

For the rest of your week, look for continued near to below normal
temperatures. Beyond Tuesday, the weather looks to be dry, with
the next chance for rain coming early next week.

Godwin

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    71  35  45  30  53 /  10  90  80   5   0
Waco                76  36  44  28  54 /   0  80 100   5   5
Paris               68  35  43  27  51 /  10  60  70   0   0
Denton              67  34  46  27  52 /  10  70  60   0   0
McKinney            69  34  44  27  52 /  10  80  70   5   0
Dallas              71  35  45  30  53 /  10  90  80   5   0
Terrell             71  35  44  27  53 /  10  90  90   5   0
Corsicana           75  38  43  30  52 /   5  80 100   5   5
Temple              80  38  44  29  54 /   0  80 100   5   5
Mineral Wells       68  32  44  25  52 /  10  70  60   0   0

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

91