000
FXUS64 KFWD 281229
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
629 AM CST Sat Dec 28 2019


.AVIATION...
/12z TAFs/

Concerns and challenges: Cig and vsby restrictions through 18z.
Timing of warm sector SHRA/Iso TS this morning, then line of TSRA
this afternoon. Minor concern, wind shift behind surface trough
between 21z and 00z Sunday, then FROPA Sun morning.

A deep, strong mid level trough and upper jet maximum over NM/W TX
will continue to approach all D10 terminals later this morning.
Impressive height falls moving into the area is enhancing low
level warm advection with southerly 925mb flow expected to
approach and even exceed 40 knots. This process has resulted in
IFR and spotty LIFR cigs up the entire I-35 corridor with SHRA
increasing in coverage with embedded/isolated TS within the warm
sector. When brief heavier SHRA occur, mixing from lift and
precipitation may briefly help break out the IFR/LIFR to MVFR or
even low VFR, but it won`t last long.

Warm sector SHRA/TS will impact all terminals off/on through 16z
this morning, before we see a 3-4 hour lull in convection as the
broad warm sector shifts east away from D10 terminals. We`ll await
the arrival of the surface trough/broken line of TS which I will
have arriving in the 19z-22z time frame this afternoon.

The broken line of TS will be fairly progressive and expect
impacts at all airports to only last a few hours around early-mid
afternoon, before shifting east of I-35 and D10 terminals.
Occasionally gusty S/SE winds 10 to 15 knots will become SW around
10 knots after surface trough passage, before gradually veering
more W less than 10 knots after 06z Sunday. Very gusty WNW/NW
winds arrive by 18z Sunday, but will let later TAFs address this
issue with such a busy first 9-12 hours on the 12z TAF set.

05/

&&


.SHORT TERM... /Issued 400 AM CST Sat Dec 28 2019/

/Today and Tonight/

A stormy weather pattern is expected for your Saturday and
Saturday night, as our long-awaited, deep mid level trough exits
the Rockies and out over the Central and Southern Plains later
today and tonight. Models, as expected with such deep and vigorous
mid level systems with strong jet energy in the southern latitudes
have have slowed down the arrival of convection by 3-6 hours from
24 hours ago.

We`ll enjoy one more above normal, mild day, before Winter makes
it long-awaited return later this weekend into early next week.
Currently, a lead shortwave continues to rotate northeast out
across West Texas and the Panhandles early this morning. A broken
line of thunderstorms extended from the eastern Texas Panhandle,
to Childress, to near Sweetwater and down into the Big Country
pre-dawn this morning. This activity was being driven by the left
exit region of an intense and cyclonically curved upper jet
maximum of upward to 200 knots at 300 mb over the Big Bend area.
A surface trough was deepening across the South Plains near
Lubbock and will progress eastward toward western parts of North
and Central Texas after daybreak this morning. A 30-35 knot 925mb
low level jet is expected to increase to between 40-45 knots, as
warm advection and associated stratus continues to overspread the
region with southeast surface winds of 10-15 mph helping to draw
in rich surface dew point values in the lower 60s across mainly
those areas along and east of I-35 through the morning hours. The
approach of the large-scale ascent associated with the
aforementioned upper jet maximum should help continue to lift,
moisten, and weaken the elevated mixed layer aloft through the
morning hours.

I expect a rapid increase in warm sector convective development to
occur by daybreak this morning and after across a good chunk of
the area -- as we await the surface trough and associated line of
storms out west to approach areas along and west of US 281. With
the elevated mixed layer not completely eroded until later this
morning, I believe most of this activity will be in the form of
showers moving rapidly northward through the Red River Valley.
Steepening mid level lapse rates may result in a few embedded
thunderstorms, but nothing strong or severe in nature through
mid-morning. As the core of the deep mid level trough exits across
the High Plains through midday, warm sector activity will shift
east and northeast of our area, with a brief lull in convection
for all but the far western counties by midday. The main strong
mid level impulse will lift northeast across Northwest Texas and
Oklahoma this afternoon with the surface trough shifting
progressively east across North and Central Texas in response to
impressive mid level height falls spreading eastward.

A broken line of strong thunderstorms will move east along and in
advance of the surface trough before entering East Texas by early
evening. Though large-scale ascent and deep layer wind shear will
be very impressive, but the lack of warming and corruption from
warm sector convection during the morning hours should keep
destabilization of the thermodynamic environment limited as this
line of storms moves west to east across the area. Another
limiting factor aloft will be the steeper mid level lapse rates
trailing and remaining well west of the better low level moisture
across East Texas into the Ark-La-Tex region this afternoon and
evening. With this in mind, the better prospects for severe
weather should be mostly northeast and east of our CWA, though we
certainly couldn`t rule out a brief, marginally severe storm along
or ahead of the line across our East Texas counties later this
afternoon through early evening.

The surface trough will clear the area later this evening,
however, a secondary and deep mid level impulse will drive across
the Southern Plains overnight into the early morning hours Sunday.
Though lower levels will be drying out across much of the CWA,
some residual richer moisture at 850mb will remain across our
southeast counties for continued low chances for high-based or
likely elevated storms. With steep lapse rates aloft, some small
hail may occur with stronger storms, but for the most part
activity should be of the general variety.

After one more warm day with highs in the 60s to lower 70s
southeast, partially clearing skies and dry air entraining into
the area from west and southwest behind our surface trough will
allow lows to fall into the upper 30s to mid 40s west, while lows
remain up into the upper 40s and lower 50s southeast where cloud
cover and moisture will be more established.

05/

&&

.LONG TERM... /Issued 400 AM CST Sat Dec 28 2019/

/Sunday through Friday/

Rain chances will linger through the initial part of Sunday.
Near seasonal temperatures are anticipated through the remainder
of 2019 with a slight warming trend as we head into the first part
of 2020. Accompanying these slightly warmer conditions will be
rain chances on New Year`s Day (Wednesday) and on Thursday. We
will dry out again on Friday and into the first weekend of 2020
with another front sliding through the region.

The Pacific front responsible for showers and storms should
continue to push deeper into East Texas through Sunday morning. A
very strong upper level jet streak will orient itself parallel to
the front aloft and hi-res guidance indicates a potential for
post-frontal convection. 00 UTC ECMWF isentropic progs indicate
enough moisture and upglide will remain in place for some low PoPs
(rain showers) between 12 and 18 UTC Sunday and I`ve added this
to the forecast. By noon Sunday, I expect that the surface
pressure gradient will be pretty tight and we`ll see west winds in
response area wide. Sustained speeds could approach Wind Advisory
levels, especially across Central Texas, though it looks like
we`ll remain just shy of criteria for now. Regardless sustained
winds of 15 to 25 MPH with gusts to near 30 MPH are forecast. Cold
air advection could be offset by the added downslope component to
the wind as well as solar insolation meaning that highs may not
be quite as low as initially perceived. While relatively cooler
conditions (relative to this past week) are anticipated, I`ll
keep highs closer to the warmer end of the guidance spectrum with
readings in the low 50s across western North Texas/Big Country to
low 60s across Central/Brazos Valley.

Sunday Night into Monday morning will be cold with many areas near
or just below "freezing". A few of the sheltered/low-lying areas
across the Big Country and Central Texas may dip down into the mid
20s. There does appear to be a decent amount of dry air at the
surface during this time (hence the colder conditions) and I
believe this will largely mitigate a widespread fog episode. While
the potential for at least patchy fog is non-zero, I`ll forgo
mentioning any in the worded forecasts due to the larger t-td
spreads.

Monday and Tuesday should end up being cooler overall for the
area as northwest winds become more northerly. With the downslope
wind being a non-factor, highs in the mid to upper 50s appear
reasonable with a slightly greater magnitude of CAA. Monday night
into Tuesday should be another cold night as high pressure
remains across the region. With clear skies, light winds and a dry
airmass, this may be the more optimal night for radiational
cooling (versus Sunday night - Monday Morning). Near "freezing"
conditions should materialize across many areas, outside of the
more urbanized areas. Mostly sunny skies and light winds should
make the afternoon`s feel pretty pleasant, however. New Year`s Eve
won`t be quite as cold as the previous nights as southerly flow
and modest WAA commence. Previous rain chances have been removed
for this time period as the next upper system appears a tad slower
than previous model solutions.

For New Year`s Day, rain chances will slowly increase as WAA
strengthens during the day. Similar to yesterday`s model runs,
the National Blend of Models appears a little too high on PoPs
initially given the deterministic model output of a slower
emergence of the upper low from the west. I`ll have just slight
chance to chance PoPs area-wide (as opposed to likely PoPs) during
the daylight hours on New Year`s Day, with better rain chances
into Thursday when ascent associated with the upper low and front
will be greatest. CAPE from deterministic and probabilistic
guidance appears meager and for now, I`ll omit any thunder in the
forecast. Despite the clouds and rain chances, southerly flow
will allow afternoon high temperatures to climb 3 to 5 degrees
above normal Wednesday and Thursday. Another Pacific front is
forecast to slide through the area on Friday. Similar to Sunday,
northwest flow post-FROPA will lessen the magnitude of CAA and
thus high temperatures will remain a hair above climatological
norms.

Bain

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    68  46  59  35  58 / 100  10   0   0   0
Waco                70  46  61  32  62 /  80  20  10   0   0
Paris               67  47  57  34  54 / 100 100  10   0   0
Denton              66  43  57  30  57 / 100   5   0   0   0
McKinney            67  45  58  33  56 /  90  20   5   0   0
Dallas              69  48  58  35  58 /  90  10   5   0   0
Terrell             69  46  60  33  58 / 100  60  10   0   0
Corsicana           71  47  62  35  58 / 100  50  20   0   0
Temple              70  46  62  33  61 /  70  20  10   0   0
Mineral Wells       66  41  56  30  57 /  90   5   0   0   0

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

05