019
FXUS64 KFWD 101207 AAA
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
707 AM CDT Thu Oct 10 2019

.AVIATION...
/12Z TAFs/

Timeline of aviation impacts in Metroplex:
- MVFR stratus this morning
- gusty south winds today
- evening thunderstorms, some may be severe
- FROPA by midnight, gusty north winds through Friday
- postfrontal showers and MVFR stratus Friday morning

The impulse responsible for the elevated convection this morning
is pushing east of the I-35 corridor. A few trailing showers may
result in some light at Metroplex TAF sites through the morning
push, but the thunderstorms will only be an issue for the
northeast arrival corridor through mid-morning. An unrelated
stratus deck beneath a strengthening inversion will slowly lift
but persist into the afternoon. The 12Z RAOB from KFWD sampled a
42-kt LLJ within the cloud-bearing layer, the momentum from which
will increase the surface wind speeds and gustiness as the
boundary layer deepens later this morning.

A strong cold front, clearly visible on KAMA WSR-88D data, will
steadily approach from the northwest today. Although the wind
shift may not arrive in the Metroplex until late this evening,
prefrontal thunderstorms, focused in a narrow window before
FROPA, may disrupt the surface wind field. Some thunder will
linger after the permanent wind shift, but the activity will
transition to primarily showers during the early morning hours
Friday. As the postfrontal layer deepens, MVFR stratus will
slowly lift during the daylight hours Friday, eventually clearing
Friday afternoon (currently beyond the scope of the 12Z TAF
package).

25

&&

.SHORT TERM... /Issued 411 AM CDT Thu Oct 10 2019/
/Through Friday/

The main corridor for ascent and convective activity has remained
primarily to our northwest as unseasonably high mid-level heights
have kept the bulk of North and Central Texas rain-free. However,
our extended dry spell will likely come to an end as a potent
cold front moves through the region tonight. In the meantime,
another impulse ahead of the main system will yield some elevated
showers and thunderstorms in our northwest zones through mid-
morning, before lifting north of the Red River.

A surface low is racing east through Kansas early this morning,
well ahead of its parent cyclone, which is only now emerging from
the Northern Rockies. The pull of the surface low has surged
stratus northward, and North and Central Texas will be blanketed
with clouds by daybreak. Despite the impressive warm advection
regime, a strengthening capping inversion will keep the Gulf
moisture separated from the elevated ascent transiting our
northwest zones. The inversion will also slow the erosion of the
cloud deck today; but even with considerably less sun than
previous days, the low-level warm advection will allow afternoon
temperatures to top 90 degrees, particularly south of the I-20
corridor. Even with this extraordinary warmth and rich Gulf
moisture, the warming above the boundary layer will reinforce the
cap, and the radar scope will likely remain quiet until the front
arrives late in the day.

The cold front has already entered the Texas Panhandle and will
make steady progress throughout the day, reaching our northwest
zones before nightfall. Well separated from the main storm system
lumbering through the Central Plains, the front should be largely
free of convection until it reaches the richer moisture closer to
the I-35 corridor. The initial development along the boundary may
be during the early afternoon across central and southern
Oklahoma, the southern extent of which may slip south of the Red
River by mid-afternoon. Despite MLCAPE values surging over 2000
J/kg at peak heating, convective initiation within North Texas may
be limited to the mechanical forcing along the surface front.
Rapidly developing updrafts may have a tendency to rotate, aided
by the enhanced helicity near the boundary. These initial discrete
cells could pose a tornado threat, but this window will be small
as updrafts rooted in the unstable boundary layer will quickly
become undercut with postfrontal air. Storm motion parallel to the
advancing boundary will promote a steady evolution into a linear
complex that will maintain a wind threat well into the evening
hours. Embedded rotating updrafts will enhance the hail threat,
which unlike the wind/tornado threats, will persist after the
passage of the front.

A linear complex along the front will make steady progress
overnight, shifting south and east of the Dallas/Fort Worth
Metroplex by midnight. Although the threat of damaging winds may
diminish as the line moves into Central and East Texas during the
early morning hours, a well defined gust front will struggle to
outrun the frontal boundary, the storms remaining nearly
coincident with the front. This sudden burst of wind may still
exceed 40 mph during the predawn hours before the front clears
our CWA before daybreak Friday morning.

Dramatically colder air will pour into the region on Friday, many
locations beginning the day in the 40s with brisk north winds.
The combination of cold advection and postfrontal stratus may cap
afternoon temperatures in the 50s though the sun will likely re-
emerge Friday afternoon, particularly in areas north of the I-20
corridor. Lingering showers will eventually end across Central and
East Texas during the daylight hours, but the cloudy skies and
breezy conditions will continue throughout the afternoon.

25

&&

.LONG TERM... /Issued 411 AM CDT Thu Oct 10 2019/
/Friday Night Onward/

Cooler and substantially drier air will continue filtering into
the forecast area Friday night as surface high pressure
establishes itself across the Southern and Central Plains. This
should set the stage for a crisp Saturday morning with
temperatures reaching their coolest values since April. The
combination of clearing skies and lessening wind speeds should
make cooling particularly favorable across our northwestern
zones, where some readings could approach the freezing mark. At a
minimum, at least some patchy frost could be occur in these
locales by daybreak Saturday. The rest of the forecast area will
generally remain in the upper 30s and low 40s. Otherwise, a cool
and pleasant fall day will be in store with highs climbing into
the 60s.

By Saturday evening, low-level southerly flow will intensify ahead
of a fast-moving impulse transiting zonal flow aloft. This will
significantly increase isentropic ascent above the cool and dry
post-frontal air. Confidence has increased that this wave of
ascent should be capable of initiating elevated convection as
saturation occurs in the already-unstable 850-600mb layer,
characterized by lapse rates of 7 C/km. Precipitation should
largely consist of showery activity, although it`s not impossible
some more robust convective updrafts could result in a few rumbles
of thunder. If precipitation intensity is lighter than expected,
it may be subject to some significant evaporation as it falls into
the low theta-e airmass within the lowest 3 kft. The main time
period for this potential will be Saturday night and Sunday
morning, with activity tapering off to the east by Sunday
afternoon. Afterwards, the clearing skies combined with southerly
surface winds will result in a noteworthy warmup for most of the
area, with highs returning to the upper 70s to around 80.

Low-level moisture will largely remain scoured from the area until
Monday, when a stronger warm advection regime establishes itself.
Dewpoints should climb back into the upper 50s and 60s early in
the week, while afternoon highs also return to above normal
levels. The overall synoptic pattern during this time will
feature continued fast zonal flow aloft, with weak disturbances
occasionally rippling through. This will continue to provide the
area with some low rain chances, although attempting to pin down
these subtle features days in advance is a futile exercise. Will
maintain some low broad PoPs mainly on Tuesday when ensemble data
suggests the greatest rain chances may exist. Another frontal
intrusion could occur late Tuesday or Wednesday, as an upper
trough transiting the Upper Midwest pulls a weak cold front
through the central CONUS. This would be a weaker front than its
predecessor, although it could result in some additional low rain
chances and near-normal temperatures during the midweek time
period.

-Stalley

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    90  47  60  41  66 /  10 100  50   5  10
Waco                93  49  61  39  67 /  10 100  60  10  10
Paris               87  46  58  37  61 /  10 100  60  10   5
Denton              89  45  59  35  65 /  20 100  40   5  10
McKinney            89  46  59  36  64 /  10 100  50   5  10
Dallas              90  47  60  43  66 /   5 100  50   5  10
Terrell             90  47  60  39  66 /   5 100  60  10  10
Corsicana           92  50  60  42  64 /   5 100  60  10  10
Temple              93  50  61  41  66 /  10 100  60  10  10
Mineral Wells       90  45  60  35  65 /  20 100  40  10   5

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

25