000
FXUS64 KFWD 081110 AAA
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
610 AM CDT Tue Oct 8 2019

.AVIATION...
/12Z TAFs/

VFR with light winds. Southeast flow returning today.

The axis of our postfrontal surface high will gradually transit
the region today. Although it may take another several hours for a
consistent southerly component to be established, the interim wind
speeds should be light enough to permit south flow throughout the
morning push. Some cirrus will arrive from the west this evening,
but the boundary layer will remain free of clouds today and
tonight.

Wind speeds will increase on Wednesday with a corresponding uptick
in low-level moisture. However, daytime CU will be primarily
confined to Central and East Texas.

25

&&

.DISCUSSION... /Issued 338 AM CDT Tue Oct 8 2019/
Forecast highlights include a warm midweek period, followed by a
strong cold front set to arrive late Thursday. This front will
bring a chance for some strong or severe storms, followed by a
massive temperature drop to end the week. A pleasant weekend
should follow.

We`re experiencing the coolest temperatures since May this morning
with most of the forecast area beginning the day in the 50s. A few
notoriously cool locales in low terrain have managed to drop into
the mid to upper 40s thanks to light winds, clear skies, and low
dewpoints. However, the return of east/southeast winds today will
allow a warming trend to ensue, and high temperatures will return
to the 80s for most locations. With moisture absent from the
area, skies will remain clear.

An upper disturbance currently pivoting through southern Nevada
will drift eastward over the next couple of days. This feature
will act to intensify low-level southerly flow, which in turn
will cause higher dewpoints to advect northward. In addition, this
disturbance should be capable of initiating some elevated
convection across parts of the Texas Panhandle and Oklahoma on
Wednesday morning. At this time, am expecting all of this activity
to remain north of the forecast area, although it may serve to
increase mid/high cloud cover across North Texas during the day.
With stronger southerly flow in place, high temperatures will
climb back above normal after our brief taste of fall, with mid
80s to low 90s commonplace on Wednesday afternoon.

As the lead disturbance continues an eastward trek towards the
Midwest, a potent upper trough will dig southward across the
Rockies and into the Central Plains on Thursday. This will prompt
strong lee cyclogenesis in western Kansas, plunging the system`s
associated cold front southward. In advance of this system, North
Texas will be positioned within a classic warm advection regime,
with moisture continuing to increase through Thursday. Resultant
warm advection should lead to a round of morning stratus, and
perhaps a few warm advection showers across parts of North Texas.
By late Thursday afternoon, the front should be on our doorstep,
set to dive through the forecast area Thursday night into Friday.
Warming ahead of the front will allow above normal temperatures to
continue, with highs near 90 across much of the area. Some
discrepancies on the front`s timing still exist, and will
continue to be refined over the next couple of days.

By the time the front arrives, fairly widespread convection should
already be underway through parts of Oklahoma and northwestern
Texas. At this time, it appears the potential for any open warm
sector convection preceding the front is quite low due to a strong
cap from the aforementioned warm advection along with a lack of
forcing. Most of the upper-level dynamic ascent will remain well
north of the area. This should confine most of our convective
chances to thunderstorms immediately along and just behind the
front as the boundary dives southward. The overall parameter space
ahead of the front will be characterized by large instability
given the above normal temperatures and mid 60s dewpoints in
place. In addition, shear will be on the increase as mid-level
winds intensify with the approaching upper trough. This will
support at least some threat for strong to severe storms across
North Texas late Thursday, but the overall severe threat appears
to be limited for a few reasons. First, storm motion and deep-
layer shear vectors should be oriented rather parallel to the
boundary. This should imply fairly rapid upscale growth, and a
tendency for developing surface-based convection to be undercut
quickly. Second, as previously discussed, the front will largely
be operating alone in terms of ascent without aid from strong
dynamic ascent to reduce any residual capping or steepen lapse
rates. Lastly, conditions should become marginally less favorable
for surface-based convection as we progress into the evening hours
with a cooling boundary layer. Will advertise a risk for
strong/severe winds in case any organized bowing segments can
exist immediately along the boundary. In addition, a hail threat
could exist if an elevated rotating storm can survive behind the
front. The tornado potential appears rather low with an expected
poor orientation of the low-level shear vector to any linear
convective structures. Most of the forecast is expected to see at
least a small amount of rain with this system, but its rather fast
progression should limit totals, as well as the potential for
flooding.

Otherwise, the cold front will be accompanied by a significant
temperature and humidity drop heading into Friday. Initially,
light stratiform rain may exist following the front`s passage, but
the arrival of very dry air should limit its duration. North
winds of 20-30 mph should exist behind the front and continue into
Friday as a stout 1028mb high builds across the Southern Plains.
Strong cold advection and lingering cloud cover could prevent
parts of North Texas from climbing out of the 50s on Friday, which
would be a temperature drop of over 30 degrees from Thursday`s
expected highs. All precipitation should cease by Friday night,
leaving a crisp and cool Saturday morning area-wide. Most
locations will be in the 40s to begin the weekend, with even some
upper 30s possible across the northwest. A pleasant and dry
weekend should be in store as temperatures gradually moderate.
Guidance diverges heading into next week, although it does appear
some rain chances will return on Monday and Tuesday. A warm front
should lift northward during this time, and moisture will be on
the increase with the return of southerly flow.

-Stalley

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    82  62  88  72  91 /   0   0  10   0  20
Waco                83  57  91  71  94 /   0   0   0   0   5
Paris               77  54  81  63  84 /   0   0   5   5  10
Denton              80  56  86  70  90 /   0   0  10   5  20
McKinney            80  54  86  69  88 /   0   0  10   0  20
Dallas              82  62  88  73  91 /   0   0  10   0  10
Terrell             81  54  87  70  91 /   0   0   0   0   5
Corsicana           82  56  86  69  91 /   0   0   0   0   5
Temple              83  58  90  72  93 /   0   0   0   0   5
Mineral Wells       81  56  89  70  90 /   0   0   5   0  20

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

25/26