974
FXUS64 KFWD 091204 AAA
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
704 AM CDT Wed Oct 9 2019

.AVIATION...
/12Z TAFs/

Nocturnal/morning stratus. Otherwise, VFR with gusty south flow.

The main proliferation of early morning stratus has been across
the Hill County as a nocturnal low-level jet beneath FL010 has
scraped the Balcones Escarpment. But an ambitious ribbon has raced
up the I-35 corridor, blanketing Waco and teasing the Metroplex.
The 12Z RAOB from KFWD sampled a 30-knot low-level jet, which may
briefly reinforce this layer until the sun scatters the deck. In
the meantime, temporary ceilings FL010-015 will occur at our
Metroplex terminals. IFR ceilings will still be possible across
Central Texas past sunrise. Wind speeds will increase as some of
the low-level jet`s momentum reaches the surface.

Convective activity will remain northwest of the D10 TRACON today
and tonight, but some showers/storms may continue to disrupt the
northwest arrival corridor into the afternoon and evening hours.

As the boundary layer moistens further, an earlier onset of
stratus is expected tonight. These ceilings will be more
persistent, lifting into the VFR corridor by midday Thursday.

FROPA and associated convection Thursday night is still beyond the
scope of the DFW TAF.

25

&&

.DISCUSSION... /Issued 340 AM CDT Wed Oct 9 2019/
The main focus of the forecast continues to be the significant
cold front set to arrive Thursday evening, accompanied by chances
for a few strong or severe storms.

The current synoptic pattern is characterized by a lead shortwave
currently swinging through the Texas panhandle in advance of a
deep upper trough over the Pacific Northwest. Presently, the lead
disturbance is contributing to scattered elevated convection to
our north and west. This activity is largely expected to miss the
forecast area, or at most clip or northwestern zones this morning.
Some new development to our west is possible later this afternoon
and evening as weak height falls continue, which may have a
slightly higher chance of affecting areas north of a Graham to
Paris line through the evening or into tonight. Meanwhile, the
disturbance has also acted to increase southerly flow through the
low levels, and the resultant warm advection will mean a warmer
and more humid day as temperatures bounce back above normal while
dewpoints climb into the 60s.

As the lead wave exits eastward, the Pacific Northwest low will
dig southeastward into the Plains heading into Thursday while
deepening even further. This potent storm system will be
accompanied by a significant cold front, which will make itself
known across the entire central CONUS through the late week time
period. In advance of this system, southerly flow will strengthen
further into Thursday, ushering in greater moisture content and
warmer air. Despite the resultant increase in cloud cover,
temperatures should easily climb into the upper 80s and low 90s
throughout Thursday afternoon while the cold front approaches from
the northwest. Some warm advection showers can`t be ruled out,
but am generally not expecting much precipitation throughout the
day Thursday. Strong warm advection through the low-levels should
maintain a healthy capping inversion over the open warm sector
despite the efforts of diurnal heating.

By late Thursday afternoon or early Thursday evening, the front
should enter our northwestern zones, already accompanied by fairly
widespread convective activity. With storm motion and deep-layer
shear vectors both oriented roughly parallel to the boundary,
convection should have a tendency to grow upscale quickly before
becoming undercut by the much cooler post-frontal air. There still
appears to be a low-end threat for strong or severe storms with
this system, with the greatest risk generally along and north of
Highway 380. This area should experience convection just after
peak heating when moderate instability and strengthening deep-
layer shear will coincide, and storms along the front may have a
greater chance to remain surface based for a few hours there. A
threat for strong winds will exist with any organized segments
along the front. In addition, as storms become elevated above the
sharp frontal zone, a hail risk could also exist, particularly if
any more isolated rotating updrafts can survive there.

The front will rapidly dive southward through the remainder of
Thursday night, likely clearing our southeastern zones by
daybreak. Since the bulk of the upper-level dynamic ascent will
move eastward into the Midwest, ascent will largely be limited to
lift immediately along and just behind the frontal surface. This
should lead to a decrease in both coverage and intensity of
convection the farther south the front progresses. Elevated
showery activity will remain possible behind the front, however,
gradually tapering off into the day on Friday. The fast motion of
the front should limit rainfall totals as well as the flooding
potential. However, it does appear that most areas in the CWA will
see at least a small amount of rainfall with this system.

Besides the associated convective chances, this front will
deliver a significant cooldown. Temperatures will plummet 30-40
degrees as it moves through while being accompanied by breezy
north winds of 20-30 mph with some higher gusts. Some areas may
need a Wind Advisory through the overnight period and into Friday,
and this will be assessed further in subsequent forecasts.
Lingering cloud cover and strong cold advection should hold
temperatures fairly steady through Friday, with most areas
lingering in the 50s and low 60s. Skies should continue clearing
into Friday night while winds decrease, setting the stage for a
crisp Saturday morning. It appears lows will bottom out in the
upper 30s and low 40s although we`ll need to keep an eye on some
of our typical cool spots which could dip a few degrees lower.
Statistical guidance is actually showing temperatures as low as
33(!) at Graham for Saturday morning. As drier air continues to
filter in, a clear and slightly milder Saturday afternoon is in
store with highs in the 60s and low 70s.

The next forecast concern is the potential for elevated showers
to develop Saturday night into Sunday. Wind fields should turn
around to the south rather quickly due to an approaching shortwave
embedded within fast zonal flow aloft. This will lead to a
strengthening low-level jet and strong isentropic ascent across
the Southern Plains. At a minimum, this should lead to an increase
in mid-level cloudiness, and perhaps some precipitation as well.
However, the very dry low levels may preclude any precipitation
from reaching the surface. The ECMWF has consistently been
producing QPF with this feature while the majority of other
guidance suggests the column would be too dry. We`ll have to
continue watching this over the next few days, with strong
isentropic ascent being a great recipe for busting my current dry
forecast.

It appears fast zonal flow aloft will continue into next week,
with perhaps a couple additional subtle disturbances rippling
through. This setup warrants the inclusion of some low rain
chances in the forecast Monday and Tuesday, along with a continued
warming trend as a warm advection regime establishes itself.
Another frontal intrusion could occur through the midweek time
period, although this remains uncertain at this time.

-Stalley

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    87  74  91  50  59 /   5   5  10  80  50
Waco                89  74  94  54  61 /   0   0   5  60  60
Paris               83  68  85  48  59 /   5  10  10  80  60
Denton              87  73  90  47  58 /   5  10  10  80  40
McKinney            87  72  89  48  58 /   5   5  10  80  50
Dallas              87  74  91  51  59 /   5   5  10  80  50
Terrell             87  72  92  51  58 /   5   0  10  70  60
Corsicana           89  71  91  54  62 /   0   0   5  60  60
Temple              88  73  94  55  63 /   0   0   5  60  60
Mineral Wells       89  72  91  45  57 /  10   5  10  70  40

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

25/26