000
FXUS61 KILN 161809
AFDILN

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wilmington OH
109 PM EST Mon Dec 16 2019

.SYNOPSIS...
Another upper level disturbance will pass northeast through the
region in concert with southwest flow through a deep layer,
initiating more rain this afternoon that will mix with and
change to snow from northwest to southeast starting this
evening. The axis of the upper trough will cross the region
early Tuesday, ending any lingering snow and ushering in colder
air behind a surface cold front Tuesday night.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 PM THIS EVENING/...
Precipitation is spreading quickly to the northeast this
afternoon. Have adjusted PoPs accordingly. Also, looks like
there could be a little more snow across the Whitewater Valley
into the Dayton metro for late this afternoon into this evening.
Have raised overall snow totals in this area to 2-4 inches.

Previous discussion --->

Scattered pcpn in the south and southeast will increase in
coverage and lift north and northeast this afternoon as a low
level jet approaches the region from the south. This will
eventually result in snow across our far northwest, rain/snow
mix in the middle, and all rain elsewhere. Highs will range from
th mid 30s north to the lower 40s south.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 PM THIS EVENING THROUGH 6 PM TUESDAY/...
Surface energy will pass south of the area this evening and
then northeast along the spine of the Appalachians tonight. As
it does, colder air will be pulled in from the north and any
rain will change to snow from northwest to southeast overnight.
A period of freezing rain is possible nearest the I-71 corridor
where a half inch to inch of additional snow is possible
tonight. Northwest of this corridor, snow will be more prevalent
for a longer period of time and 1-3 inches are expected here.
The better axis of 2-3 inches should occur from a line that
extends northeast from Richmond to Piqua to West Liberty, and
Richwood.

Ice accumulations will generally be light and should only amount
to a glaze but the thermodynamics and timing of how the
atmosphere will cool and in which layers remain in a state of
flux.

Temperatures have not been changed much with highs today in the
35-40 range and lows tonight within 2-3 degrees of 30, coolest
in the northwest. Tuesday will be cooler but not markedly so
given the ample cloud cover. Cold air will funnel into the
region and high temperatures may occur after midnight tonight.
However, models are suggesting that insolation through the
course of the day and the drier air may permit readings to reach
back to what they were at the beginning of the day. Regardless,
we are only looking for a 5-8 degree variance in temperatures
from today through Tuesday, including overnight lows.

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY NIGHT THROUGH MONDAY/...
Upper low diving southeast across Ontario into New England at
the beginning of the period will push a cold front across the
region late Tuesday night into Wednesday morning. Cannot rule
out a few snow showers in central and west central Ohio being
somewhat closer to the stronger forcing. But probability is low
and so have just included some flurries.

High pressure will build in behind the front and the pass off
to the east on Thursday as upper heights rise. Temperatures will
be cold, especially Wednesday night into Thursday morning as
there should be very good radiational cooling conditions. But
readings will start to moderate late in the week.

A mid level trough will pass across the area with maybe a weak
surface reflection grazing the region. This will just bring an
increase in clouds. Heights will start to build again on Sunday
with west to southwest low level flow. Thus expect above normal
temperatures over the weekend.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z MONDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
A messy TAF forecast is in store fore the next 18 hours with
conditions improving thereafter.

An embedded disturbance will move from the southern Plains to
the western Ohio Valley this afternoon into Tuesday morning. An
associated area of low pressure over northern Louisiana will
also move northeast into the Tennessee Valley tonight, then
toward the mid Atlantic region by Tuesday morning. These
features will bring precipitation to our region. Temperatures at
the surface and aloft will be critical to precipitation type. As
of now, precipitation should fall mainly as rain at KCVG/KLUK
with some freezing rain possible toward the tail end late
tonight into Tuesday morning. Farther north, KILN is a little
tricky given that it will be near the freezing mark. Have
started out as rain with freezing rain occurring later tonight.
Will monitor. KCMH/KLCK will see a rain/snow mix, perhaps rain,
then some freezing rain on the tail end late tonight into
Tuesday. For KDAY, a period of snow, possible moderate, is
expected late this afternoon into this evening. Snow will mix
with freezing rain or perhaps change to all freezing rain
overnight before tapering off Tuesday morning. Ceilings and
visibilities will range between IFR and LIFR with more IFR
ceilings and MVFR visibilities as we transition into the 06Z to
12Z Tuesday time frame. Winds will back with time and increase
from the north with gusts in the 20 to 25 knot range possible.

On Tuesday, as the system moves away, low level clouds will
gradually shift and erode during the morning into the afternoon.
We will see a return to VFR conditions during this period.

OUTLOOK...MVFR ceilings possible Tuesday night into Wednesday.

&&

.ILN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...Winter Weather Advisory from 4 PM this afternoon to 10 AM EST
     Tuesday for OHZ026-034-035-042>046-051>056-060>062.
     Winter Weather Advisory from 11 PM this evening to 10 AM EST
     Tuesday for OHZ063>065-070>073-077-078-080.
KY...Winter Weather Advisory from 11 PM this evening to 10 AM EST
     Tuesday for KYZ089>093.
IN...Winter Weather Advisory from 4 PM this afternoon to 10 AM EST
     Tuesday for INZ050-058-059-066.
     Winter Weather Advisory from 11 PM this evening to 10 AM EST
     Tuesday for INZ073>075-080.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Franks
NEAR TERM...Franks/Hickman
SHORT TERM...Franks
LONG TERM...
AVIATION...Hickman