000
FXUS61 KILN 141441
AFDILN

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wilmington OH
941 AM EST Sat Dec 14 2019

.SYNOPSIS...
Low pressure over western Pennsylvania this morning will move
off to the east today bringing rain to an end. High pressure
will build in tonight and Sunday and then quickly move off to
the east. A storm system with a mix of precipitation will
approach on Sunday night and then move through the Ohio Valley
Monday into Monday night.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 PM THIS EVENING/...
Rain continues across roughly the eastern part of the forecast
area this morning with the back edge making its way across
east central Indiana and northwest Ohio. A s/wv is driving our
the pcpn activity. As it passes northeast across the area, the
rain will come to an end. Some breaks in the clouds may develop
during the afternoon in the wake of this system. Temperatures
are starting off relatively mild, so even though readings will
not rise too much, highs will still get into the lower to
perhaps the mid 40s.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 PM THIS EVENING THROUGH 6 PM SUNDAY/...
Cold air advection, low level flow off Lake Michigan, and a
weak northern stream short wave will thicken clouds across the
area again overnight. Cannot rule some light precipitation with
this disturbance across far northern counties with thermal
profiles suggesting rain changing to snow out of anything that
develops. Lows will be near normal.

High pressure will build in for Sunday which will help erode
lower clouds. But mid to high clouds in advance of the next
system will be overspreading the region, so any clearing will
be brief. Looks like we may get about a 10 degree rise from
morning lows.

&&

.LONG TERM /SUNDAY NIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Challenge in the forecast occurs fairly early on and resides in the
various ptypes expected. Precip will quickly ramp up as a warm front
enters from the west early Sunday evening, overspreading most of if
not the entire CWA by midnight. Warming temperatures aloft will help
the area of snow and freezing rain to lift northward slowly
overnight. Daytime insolation on Monday will give most of the area
plain rain, but a mix of snow may still occur through the day in
west central Ohio. This mix will slowly spread eseward in the
evening as the surface low ejects northward ahead of the upper level
trough. Rain will then mix with and change over to snow for all but
the southeast before ending by daybreak Tuesday in most locations.

Heavy rain is possible in the southeast CWA as upper level flow is
fairly strong from the southwest, giving a continued feed of
moisture that will get wrung out as it interacts with the surface
low. If not heavy rain, a steady moderate rain is giving pause to
WPC who has put the area in a slight risk of excessive rainfall for
Monday. Amounts southeast of the I-71 corridor should top an inch
and could reach near 2 inches in portions of northern Kentucky and
far south central Ohio.

Icing with freezing rain is not out of the question for much of the
forecast area north of the Ohio River, primarily Sunday night. While
the models are in fair agreement, the complex thermal profiles in
and around the warm front that this precipitation will be entering
with and subsequently lift northward are still uncertain. Snow is
also a little tricky but easier spelled out than the threat of
freezing rain. Expect less than a half inch along and south of the
Ohio River. One to two inches are expected in the northern half of
the CWA, with a strong gradient from that half inch at the river to
almost 2 inches near I-70.

Thermal profiles are still subject to a not insignificant change,
and headline winter weather is not a prudent product at this time.
Regardless, Sunday night into early Monday will see much of the area
with a wintery mix in the north, and steady rain to the south.

Tuesday will see just a chance of lingering snow exiting early in
the day. This will mark the change in the pattern with dry
conditions expected through the remainder of the forecast. Tuesday
will see highs range from 30 in the northwest to 40 in the
southeast, with overnight lows dipping from the mid teens to around
20 for daybreak Wednesday. The coldest air will occur Wednesday as
the surface high in the Midwest and northwest upper flow behind the
l/w trough combine to keep highs in the 20s north of the Ohio River
and around  or just below freezing south of the river.

Wednesday night will be a bit more uniform in temperatures around 20
degrees, with a warmup expected for the remainder of the week.
Thursday will be in the mid 30s to low 40s, Friday within a few
degrees of 40 and Saturday generally between 40-45, all of which
will be coldest in the north and warmest in the south given a
southerly flow through this time. Overnight lows will be in the
upper 20s to around 30.

&&

.AVIATION /15Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
Rain will occur through the early part of the TAF period. While
this will generally be light, there may be some lower visibility
between the rain and some mist. Ceilings will fall to IFR where
they are not that low already. Rain will move off to the east of
the terminals between 14Z and 18Z which will also coincide with
any visibility restrictions. IFR ceilings will improve to MVFR.
There could be some breaks in the ceiling later in the day, but
even if this occurs it will be temporary as MVFR ceilings are
expected across the area overnight. North winds will increase a
bit early on. They will then veer to northwest and eventually
west at around 10 kt.

OUTLOOK... MVFR ceilings will continue into Sunday morning.
MVFR to IFR ceilings and visibilities are likely again late
Sunday night into Monday night.

&&

.ILN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
KY...None.
IN...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Hickman
NEAR TERM...Hickman
SHORT TERM...
LONG TERM...Franks
AVIATION...